Docs / debugging (#4578)
canonical/cloud-init: doc/rtd/howto/debugging.rst

> .. _how_to_debug:

Author: Thanks! I also assume other `cloud-init` devs probably have some other starting strategies that might be worth documenting for users. I don't want this page to become a dumping ground for one-off debugging hints - the general cases are preferred here in my opinion, but I bet that we can expand on this page a bit more - suggestions are welcome :)

> .. _how_to_debug:

Author: Pinging some frequent contributors for extra eyes on this page: I'm soliciting feedback and ideas for this new user-facing debugging introduction.

@blackboxsw @aciba90 @dermotbradley @igalic @cjp256

> .. _how_to_debug:

Reviewer: Another approach to access to instances without ssh access is to create a user with password access (using the user-data) and log in via the cloud serial port console. This only works if `cc_users_groups` was able to run.

2. Try running the same user-data locally, such as in one of the
   :ref:`tutorials<tutorial_index>`. Use LXD or Qemu locally to get a shell or
   logs then debug with :ref:`these steps<did_not_do_the_thing>`.

3. Try copying the image to your local system, mount the filesystem locally
   and inspect (create a chroot in the image filesystem before attempting the
   steps in other sections).

Cloud-init did not run
======================

1. Check the output of `cloud-init status --format json`
   - what is the value of the `'extended_status'` key?
   - what is the value of the `'boot_status_code'` key?

2. Check the contents of :file:`/run/cloud-init/ds-identify.log`

3. Check the status of the services

.. code-block::

   systemctl status cloud-init-local.service cloud-init.service\
        cloud-config.service cloud-final.service

.. _did_not_do_the_thing:

Cloud-init ran, but didn't do what I want it to
===============================================

1. If you are using cloud-init's user data
   :ref:`cloud config<user_data_formats-cloud_config>`, make sure
   to :ref:`check your user data cloud config<check_user_data_cloud_config>`

> 2. Check for errors in `cloud-init status --format json`

Author: I think that when I was writing this I expected to point them to other keys as well, but I did not, and at this point I don't think I will, so I agree.

   - what is the value of the `'errors'` key?
   - what is the value of the `'recoverable_errors'` key?

> 

Author: seems appropriate in both

.. _how_to_debug:

How to debug cloud-init
***********************

> There are several cloud-init failure modes that one may need to

Author: yep, good call

debug. Debugging is specific to the scenario, but the starting points are often
similar.

I can't log in to my instance
=============================

One of the more challenging scenarios to debug is when you don't have
shell access to your instance. You have a few options:

> 1. Acquire console log messages and check for errors.

Author: see the updated wording

> 1. Acquire console log messages and check for errors.

Author: see updated wording

2. Try running the same user-data locally, such as in one of the
   :ref:`tutorials<tutorial_index>`. Use LXD or Qemu locally to get a shell or
   logs then debug with :ref:`these steps<did_not_do_the_thing>`.

3. Try copying the image to your local system, mount the filesystem locally
   and inspect (create a chroot in the image filesystem before attempting the

>    steps in other sections).

Author: > When you say "copy the image", do you mean the one used in the previous step? If they don't follow the tutorial, what image should they use?

Not necessarily. One can copy any image being used to launch the instance. This might mean exporting the image from a cloud to copy it locally, or yes if using the tutorial one could copy the image used in that.

Cloud-init did not run
======================

1. Check the output of `cloud-init status --format json`
   - what is the value of the `'extended_status'` key?
   - what is the value of the `'boot_status_code'` key?

2. Check the contents of :file:`/run/cloud-init/ds-identify.log`

3. Check the status of the services

.. code-block::

   systemctl status cloud-init-local.service cloud-init.service\

>         cloud-config.service cloud-final.service

Author: good point, I added context

.. _did_not_do_the_thing:

Cloud-init ran, but didn't do what I want it to
===============================================

1. If you are using cloud-init's user data
   :ref:`cloud config<user_data_formats-cloud_config>`, make sure
   to :ref:`validate your user data cloud config<check_user_data_cloud_config>`

> 2. Check for errors in `cloud-init status --long`

Author: I switched to --long for all examples in this doc (more readable)

   - what is the value of the `'errors'` key?
   - what is the value of the `'recoverable_errors'` key?

3. For more context on errors, check the logs files:
   - :file:`/var/log/cloud-init.log`
   - :file:`/var/log/cloud-init-output.log`

   Identify errors in the logs and the lines preceeding these errors. Ask
   yourself:

   - According to the log files, what went wrong?
   - How does the cloud-init error relate to the configuration provided
     to this instance?
   - What does the documentation say about the parts of the configuration that

>      relate to this error?

Author: > Do all of the errors raised via the logs already have corresponding docs to explain how to fix them, or is this something we need to address as well?

No, because we dont't attempt to foresee all of the possible ways that a user might pass an invalid configuration.

This is an attempt to get the user to think about whether their configuration actually makes sense and get them to actually go read the docs (many users don't).

> 

Author: Hmmm, you're making me wonder if it wouldn't be better to break up the new failure states documentation into "failure states" and "exported errors". The reason that they are grouped together is that the code changes that this documentation stems from heavily affect both, and there is a hierarchical relationship: "exported errors" occur for failure states that are "recoverable errors".

That said, from a user's perspective, it seems awkward to put them together. Here, the "exported errors" part is irrelevant, since that information is already in the logs, but the "failure states" part is very relevant to understanding what types of errors they might see.

Thoughts?

* :ref:`Cloud-init never finished running<did_not_finish_running>`

.. _cannot_log_in:

I can't log in to my instance
=============================

One of the more challenging scenarios to debug is when you don't have
shell access to your instance. You have a few options:

1. Acquire log messages from the serial console and check for any errors.

2. To access to instances without SSH access, create a user with password
   access (using the user-data) and log in via the cloud serial port console.
   This only works if ``cc_users_groups`` successfully ran.

3. Try running the same user-data locally, such as in one of the
   :ref:`tutorials<tutorial_index>`. Use LXD or QEMU locally to get a shell or
   logs then debug with :ref:`these steps<did_not_do_the_thing>`.

4. Try copying the image to your local system, mount the filesystem locally
   and inspect (create a chroot in the image filesystem before attempting the
   steps in other sections).

.. _did_not_run:

Cloud-init did not run
======================

1. Check the output of ``cloud-init status --long``

   - what is the value of the ``'extended_status'`` key?
   - what is the value of the ``'boot_status_code'`` key?

> See :ref:`here<reported_status>` for more information on the status.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See :ref:`our reported status explanation<reported_status>` for more information.
```

Reviewer 2: (I'm suggesting changing all these because using "here" as linking text is not considered best accessibility practice)

2. Check the contents of :file:`/run/cloud-init/ds-identify.log`

This log file is used by the systemd generator and sets cloud-init
to be enabled or disabled.

3. Check the status of the services

.. code-block::

    systemctl status cloud-init-local.service cloud-init.service\
        cloud-config.service cloud-final.service

Cloud-init may have started to run, but not completed. This shows how many, and
which, cloud-init stages completed.

.. _did_not_do_the_thing:

Cloud-init ran, but didn't do what I want it to
===============================================

1. If you are using cloud-init's user data
   :ref:`cloud config<user_data_formats-cloud_config>`, make sure
   to :ref:`validate your user data cloud config<check_user_data_cloud_config>`

2. Check for errors in ``cloud-init status --long``

   - what is the value of the ``'errors'`` key?
   - what is the value of the ``'recoverable_errors'`` key?

> See :ref:`here<exported_errors>` for more information on these exported errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
See :ref:`our guide on exported errors<exported_errors>` for more information.
```

are often similar:

* :ref:`I cannot log in<cannot_log_in>`
* :ref:`Cloud-init did not run<did_not_run>`
* :ref:`Cloud-init did the unexpected<did_not_do_the_thing>`
* :ref:`Cloud-init never finished running<did_not_finish_running>`

.. _cannot_log_in:

I can't log in to my instance
=============================

One of the more challenging scenarios to debug is when you don't have
shell access to your instance. You have a few options:

1. Acquire log messages from the serial console and check for any errors.

2. To access to instances without SSH access, create a user with password
   access (using the user-data) and log in via the cloud serial port console.
   This only works if ``cc_users_groups`` successfully ran.

3. Try running the same user-data locally, such as in one of the
   :ref:`tutorials<tutorial_index>`. Use LXD or QEMU locally to get a shell or
   logs then debug with :ref:`these steps<did_not_do_the_thing>`.

4. Try copying the image to your local system, mount the filesystem locally
   and inspect (create a chroot in the image filesystem before attempting the
   steps in other sections).

.. _did_not_run:

> Cloud-init did not run

Author: I think I fixed all of the rendering issues on this page.

======================

1. Check the output of ``cloud-init status --long``

   - what is the value of the ``'extended_status'`` key?

>    - what is the value of the ``'boot_status_code'`` key?

Author: > What use is the boot_status_code key to the user? Would a user understand what enabled-by-generator or any other state means?

Yeah, I guess not. We should really start requiring that new additions to user commands get additions to user docs to describe what they actually do and mean.

I suppose I can document the meaning of this too, but I'll make that a separate PR. From [the commit message](https://github.com/canonical/cloud-init/commit/274b23ec18bebc4c77357e4a5db08c0bc5627e5a) that added this key:
```
The boot-status-code can be:
 - 'unknown': systemd generators and ds-identify haven't run yet to
              determine if cloud-init should be run during this boot
 - 'disabled-by-marker-file': /etc/cloud/cloud-init.disabled exists
              which prevents cloud-init from ever running
 - 'disabled-by-generator': systemd generator ran ds-identify and
              determined no applicable cloud-init datasources
 - 'disabled-by-kernel-cmdline': kernel cmdline contained
              cloud-init=disabled
 - 'enabled-by-kernel-cmdline': kernel cmdline contained
              cloud-init=enabled
 - 'enabled-by-generator': ds-identify detected possible cloud-init
              datasources
 - 'enabled-by-sysvinit': enabled by default in SysV init environment
 ```
